# CS61CPU


Part A: <br />
* Task 1: Using the components provided to us, we created the circuits corresponding to the instructions. The multiplexers and logical gates were the most helpful in forming the circuits' behaviors, while the tunnels were important in making our circuits clean and understandable.
* Task 2: Using multiplexers and demultiplexers, we were able to read and write from and to the desired registers. We created a circuit for a register, which took in the clock, write enable(bit to represent if we wanted to write to that register), and write data(the data we want to write into the register), and output the register's data.
* Task 3:
<br /> 
Part B:
    * Task 5 Control Logic: To device this control logic many truth tables had to be created and reasoned through. We had to do a lot of boolean algebra simplification to arrive to smaller ways to implement signals for the control. For the Alu, for instance, a mapping from the funct3 fields and funct7 fields were used to build and AND, OR and NOT gates to arrive to each bit of the 4 bit ALU selector for the R-types. Then, the same thing was done for the I-types. To reason what signals should be passed through a mux, identity signals derived from the opcodes of the instruction were passed through a priority encoder which them passed its signals to a mux to define the correct ALU selector. In general, truth tables were small and the work derived from simplifying expressions was reduced by either calculating the sum-of-products or product-of-sums depending on the amount of 1s and 0s. Lastly, the control logic was designed to be made of many modular pieces, consisting of the circuits for every single signal. This approach made it easier to tackle the problem and reason through the logical in steps. 
    * Some disadvantages of my control design would be scalability. If we were to implement extensions of the RISC-V architecture probably many identity circuits would have to be rebuit and many truth tables would have to be redone for ALU sel, IMMM sel, and some other selectors. Some advantages to my design was that it took advantage of the small cases were a certain signal would have to be active. For example, for Bsel, it would only have to be 0 for R-types as they do not use any Immediate in their ALU calculations. Knowing that, Bsel was only set to 0 when the OPCODE was of the R-type. 
    * Personally, we thought that the control logic was a nice design challenge in of itself. It was a small pain to figure out all the signals at first, but when we tackled all of the signals one at a time everything was much easier to do. 
